# Exam 2020

## 1. Greedy

One of the problems in the set can be solved by a simple greedy algorithm.

### 1.a (1 pt.)

Which one?

### 1.a - answer

"Isolation" can be solved by a greedy algorithm.

### 1.b (2 pt.)

Describe the algorithm, for example by writing it in pseudocode. (Ignore parsing the input.)  
You probably want to process the input in some order; be sure to make it clear **which order** this is (increasing or decreasing order of start time, alphabetic, colour, age, size, x-coordinate, distance, number of neighbours, scariness, etc.).  
In other words, don’t just write “sort the input.”

### 1.b - answer

- $G$ will denote the graph
- $pq$ will denote a priority queue

```pseudo
function isolateVirus(G) {

  # Assume that G is an adjacency list

  degrees = {}

  # Calc init out degrees - O(V)
  for node in G {
    degrees[node] = len(G[node])
  }

  pq = new PriorityQueue() # It should have the highest degree on top

  # Init pq with nodes and their out degrees - O(V)
  for node, degree in degrees {
    pq.push(degree, node)
  }

  # Isolate
  while pq != empty {
    # Take highest ranking node
    cur_degree, cur_node = pq.pop

    # Update neighbors - O(E)
    for neighbor in G[cur_node] {
      degress[neighbor]--
      pq.update()
    }
  }
}

```

### 1.c (1 pt.)

State the running time of your algorithm in terms of the input parameters. (It must be polynomial in the input size.)

---

## 2. Graph traversal

One of the problems on pages 3–7 can be efficiently solved using (possibly several applications of) standard graph traversal methods (such as breadth-first search, depth-first search, shortest paths, connected components, spanning trees, etc.), and without using more advanced design paradigms such as dynamic programming or network flows.

### 2.a (1 pt.)

Which one?

### 2.b (2 pt.)

Describe your algorithm. As much as you can, make use of known algorithms. (For instance, don’t reinvent a well-known algorithm. Instead, write something like “I will use Blabla’s algorithm [KT, p. 342] to find a blabla in the blabla.”)

### 2.c (1 pt.)

State the running time of your algorithm in terms of the parameters of the input.

---

## 3. Dynamic programming

One of the problems on pages 3–7 is solved by dynamic programming.

### 3.a (1 pt.)

Which one?

### 3.b (3 pt.)

Following the book’s notation, let OPT(…) denote the value of a partial solution. (Maybe you need more than one parameter, like OPT(i, v). Who knows? Anyway, tell me what the parameters are—vertices, lengths, etc. and what their range is. Use words like “where \( i \in \{1, \dots, k^2\} \) denotes the length of BLABLA” or “where \( v \in R \) is a red vertex.”)  
Give a recurrence relation for OPT, including relevant boundary conditions and base cases. Which values of OPT are used to answer the problem?

### 3.c (1 pt.)

State the running time and space of the resulting algorithm in terms of the input parameters.

---

## 4. Flow

One of the problems on pages 3–7 is easily solved by a reduction to network flow.

### 4.a (1 pt.)

Which one?

### 4.b (3 pt.)

Explain the reduction. Start by drawing the graph corresponding to Sample Input 1. Be ridiculously precise about which nodes and arcs there are, how many there are (in terms of size measures of the original problem), how the nodes are connected and directed, and what the capacities are.  
Describe the reduction in general (use words like “every node corresponding to a giraffe is connected to every node corresponding to a letter by an undirected arc of capacity the length of the neck”).  
What does a maximum flow mean in terms of the original problem, and what size does it have in terms of the original parameters?

### 4.c (1 pt.)

State the running time of the resulting algorithm, be precise about which flow algorithm you use.  
(Use words like “Using Bellman–Ford (p. 5363 of the textbook), the total running time will be \( O(r \cdot t^7 \log^3 e + \log^2 k) \), where \( r \) is the number of zebras and \( k \) denotes the maximum weight of a giraffe.”)
